Hello and welcome.
In this video we're gonna be playing around vertex painting and I'm going to be creating what I would
like to call a very ugly egg head kind of thing.
So let's jump in and start talking vertex painting our sculptures super high resolution if I go to wireframe
mode you can see this much detail in here I've got 140000 vertices down the bottom of my screen you
can see it tells me that there's tons and tons of detail because of that we can get a lot of nuance
detail by painting right over the top of our sculpture using vertex paint so we go to the mode selection
and select a vertex paint Nancy over on the right hand side I've got draw brushes brush settings underneath
brush settings I can choose from my color we'll say will choose a pink.
Now if I move my brush over the top of my face I can paint directly on top of my sculpture which is
a really organic way of coloring and painting our model I'm going to do is just undo that because it's
looks cool but not exactly what I'm going for I'm gonna save up my work here and start a new scene so
that we can experiment and have a little bit of freedom to make some mistakes so save file new I'm going
to go for just general myself with our cube Let's delete the cube I'm going to shift a to add a mesh
we'll start off with you this fear now that these fears go a little bit more detail then I want to illustrate
the point I want to make I'm going to open up my selector turn this down to say 10 segments and 10 rings
Okay that's looking cool now same deal again I'm going to go up to where it says object mode I'm going
to select vertex paint I'm going to show exactly what's going on here because it's literally painting
the vertices click on our tool settings scroll down we'll find we'll do that pink once again.
Now as I move around if I'm in the middle if I'm on a face and not near a vertex nothing happens if
I go up near a vertex then boom you can see that it colors it and it's blending between the color that
we have on this vertex and the color of the other vertices around it.
So if I paint this vertex here there's quite a strong line because it's going from pink to pink and
it says everything in between is going to be pink if I change too I will say blue for this vertex over
here you can see there's a blending from blue to pink between those two.
It's pretty interesting effect it's not a great look because we've got very low number of vertices so
it would look okay if I wanted to paint this whole thing blue so if I paint that paint that then you
can see that the faces in between those vertices become blue and purple that's not too bad but if I
wanted to do any sort of nuance here wanted to paint a face on top of this for example then that would
be near on impossible to do so if you're following along just have a little of a play around so you
get familiar with what's going on here as you move your brush around it's painting over the top of the
vertex Yep cool.
Good good.
Now that's demonstrating that if we have low poly vertex painting is not going to work so well if we
don't increase the number of vertices on this I'll go to my modifiers and add a modifier will add a
subdivision surface increase viewport Bank point blank blank up to 4.
See how that looks.
Click on apply.
Now I'm still in vertex paint mode so I can go to my tools scroll down find a color we'll find a red
color.
Now as I paint around there's a lot more detail a little bit more like my head at the start of this
video.
Okay.
And so that becomes a lot more interesting we can paint on top of this and get some pretty cool effects.
Now while we're in this mode while we're just experimenting let's have a look at the tools that we have
access to drag this out a little bit so we can see the words as well draw which is what we're doing
blur which allows us if we play around with it just softens the look of it and merges what's on top
with what's underneath or it blends between the two so you can see it's becoming more white.
If I merge between a blend between here this is going to become a little bit more purple because it's
the merging the red and the blue and softening it as we go.
That's a nice way of kind of softening the edges.
If you wanted to get that sort of look particularly if you wanted to say a skin tone then we could jump
over back to draw to get a color will choose a skin tone is sort of color put that skin tone on and
then if we choose another slightly different skin tone kind of color put that over the top as well then
we could blur between them okay.
Another way to do that is by average.
So the average will take if we increase the brush sizes shows it nicely.
It will say what are all the things within the brush and paint back down the average.
They say if I click here you can see it's painted the average of the red and the blue.
If I find my yellow and click in around about here it's giving me an orange sort of color and as I paint
here it's kind of smudging it around a bit as that average changes a little bit to being incorporated
inside the brush.
It gives us a little bit of a textured look where it's blurring between the different colors.
So you can see the color there's not just one solid color and you can't see a distinct oh there's the
lighting there's a dark but allows us to merge between them which I think gives a nice kind of very
textured look to it and if you do a whole bunch of these painting in here you can push it all up and
get some you know some nice unique colors with a little bit of texture detail in it and then smear that's
a good one to know it just decrease the brush size here that just grabs what we've got and drags it
along there's a little bit more of a wet brush feel if you will if you've got you your watercolors or
your oils and you wanted to smudge the colors together to see how it feels then that will give us a
little bit more of that effect I could have chosen a few colors here a little bit at random I'm going
to go back to draw if you find yourself saying we're on Earth and my colors where are they gone then
it means you're not clicked on draw you have to click on draw to get our color picker also while we're
in draw you can right click that will give you a color picker for some quick selection bump and then
we can put that straight on what I'm going to do is open up the color palette tab just here and click
on new from there you can see a plus button and when I click on plus it will add to my palette the color
that I'm using at the moment so if I go and choose blue and click on plus it will add blue to my palette
green plus it'll add green.
This is a really nice way of not losing track if you've been doing some painting you are pretty happy
with that you don't want to have to try to remember what that particular particular color was so this
is a way of building up a palette for later use with brushes very handy so after you've clicked on the
plus you then click on the particular swatch just here's that what they called swatches that used to
be a cool watch back in the back in the day a Swiss watch if I remember correctly a swatch I didn't
have one but I think I saw some ads for swatches random thought so you click on the swatch or the panel
or the card whatever these things are called down here that allows you to change your color.
Now you might say that's exactly the look I was going for which is kind of I wanted to make a model
and that's exactly the look I wanted I want to render that out.
Take an image of it.
That's beautiful.
That's going to be the front page of my web site.
See you jump up to random mode and you look at it and you think that's well that's a little bit disappointing
isn't it.
OK.
So what do we need to do.
Let's go through the steps so that we can visualize this.
I'm going to go and drag out another window so we can have two going at once.
The first step here is for us to.
Well let me see you.
I'll ask you a little mini quiz question here.
What he thinks the first step in spinning out of visualize this when we render it the first step for
me is to come down to materials look on material property add a new material.
It's going to rename this to marbled marbles fine marbled material.
Name it whatever you want.
You have a blue or red or pink or face and the other important fact that we have a material now.
But we need to say use this very artistic layer that I'm putting on top of my object here.
So use the vertex painting the way we get that is we say we find the object data properties click on
that and you can see if we scroll down under vertex colors the tab there open that up you'll see it's
created a layer called CIOL for color.
I'm going to rename that because it does make a lot of sense to me.
I'll rename it random.
That's indicating that as random colors I've painted on here you could call it whatever you want to
call it main layer or you could call it colors whatever takes your fancy just so long as you remember
it for the next step because we need to make a reference to that in our shader Ed..
So this is why we've got our second we know jump over in the very top left you can see Ed type open
that up and I'm gonna change to shader Ed. That should have brought in some information already if you
don't see this then that might mean you haven't created new material yet it might mean that you're not
clicked on your sphere or it might mean that you are not in the correct view which is the shader Ed
view now that we have this I'm gonna hit shift a input vertex colors and random so random is remember
over here my vertex colors for my vertex coloring I was doing so shift a input vertex colors random
put that next to my principal be SDF dragged from color to base color emblem we've connected it up now
what I can do is click on my rendered viewport shading I'll take a moment and then show me what I can
see as a render now feel free to use whichever render and an engine takes your fancy I'm going to switch
this over to cycles so we can see how cycles looks because a little bit of wobbling as we move around
but pretty quick indication what's happening but the important thing to do that I wanted to make note
in this video while we're experimenting is make sure that you've got a view where you have the proper
lights going on in your scene because if you have a look at the difference between what we're playing
around with it looks like this and then the way it's going to look when it's lit is going to look like
that is that the way we want it is that that particular look we're going for.
So I'm going to do just a very basic crude three point lighting jump in object mode click on one of
my lights or the only light shift D Move it over a little bit shift again move it backwards and hop
in the side view they're all a little bit high move that one down a little bit my other view they're
all the front I'm gonna make one of them at the back it's backlit zoom around a little bit.
Make sure that they're bright enough.
They look super bright.
You've got to change the brightness on the lights.
Then you find your light bulb and you can change.
Currently there are a thousand watts.
I don't know if I want them a thousand watts that seems a lot of Watts might make this 200 and the other
one two hundred and the other one two hundred
near enough is good enough what we're doing now just experimenting.
Just wanted to show you that the light has a big impact.
So what I would do is over on the left hand view I'm going to change this to 3D viewport.
I will use my mouse wheel to scroll along so I don't have a lot of screen real estate so going to scroll
along and find random view.
Get the view that I want maybe it's going to be with the lights at the front where that little green
rubber ducky looking thing is.
I'm now going to close up my tools.
So we don't have the writing on there okay and hey presto we're ready to do a little bit of a challenge.
But first I want to show you one little trick.
Make sure we're clicked on sphere.
Jump over to vertex paint.
When when when vertex paint mode.
If I've clicked on my tools scroll down find the color that I'm interested in it might be say this color.
Just see more of a yellowy color.
If I want to just paint everything in one hit there's no fuel per say but we can go up to paint and
set vertex colors or shift case.
But that would just make everything that particular color and it change this over to my other solid
shading so that I can work on it more quickly okay.
So we've got back to kind of a yellow egg looking thing here and now is a good time for me to give you
a challenge and this is going to be one where I just want you to be silly and crazy and play around
with a tool and experiment and the challenge is to create a quick me.
If you remember the avatars you could make for your Nintendo we will let's make one of those.
If you don't remember I've just gone in search for em I which is a me and you can see this is what they
look like if you're not familiar with them well then that's what they are always gonna paint that directly
over the top of our of our egg and have it look something like me if you want to go that step further
and do a little bit of sculpting you can but this is just a quick and dirty exercise so you can see
how to go about doing vertex painting and also see that it's not necessarily the most efficient way
of painting this sort of thing but it's a fun little exercise to see what you come up with so there's
the challenge posed a video take that on now see you back here when you're done okay I hope you had
fun doing that please do Sheriff you've come up with something that you think's a little bit nifty I'm
going to start by just darkening my color making my brush smaller let's have a look at my reference
over here okay just eyes nose over to here I'll just go in and put a little bit of hair okay just zing
zing I'm going to do this pretty quick I'll speed up the video I'm not precious about how it's gonna
look
actually you know it's something I didn't mention apologies for not mentioning if we'd scroll down you
can find symmetry click on the mirror x axis sorry for telling you that as part of a challenge solution
but that allows me to find the midpoint and do a little bit of mirroring popping and I wrap up a popup
okay and there we go it's pretty bad it's pretty ugly but I just wanted to do something super quickly
just to show you the process of going about this you can see the first thing the most noticed noticeable
thing here is that we don't have enough vertices because it's getting all this jagged i.e. blurry stuff
around the outside.
That's a good thing to know when it comes to vertex painting you just need to have enough detail in
there in order to get this done so I hope you enjoy goofing around with that I'll see you in the next
video.